Project Master File: EdgeWake (Tiered Cascade Guardian)
1. Executive Summary
Traditional remote sensors fail because they rely on fixed-schedule cloud communication, which drains their batteries rapidly. EdgeWake is an ultra-low-power, multi-modal edge AI node. It utilizes a "Tiered Cascade" architecture where low-power analog tripwires (flame/gas) are used to wake up high-power verification systems (vision/audio) only when a localized threat is detected. Once verified, the node hands off the alert to an n8n automation engine, ensuring the device spends 99% of its life in deep sleep.
+1

2. The "Tiered Cascade" Architecture Logic
To avoid crashing the ESP32-CAM and to preserve maximum battery life, the system operates in distinct stages:

Tier 1: Deep Sleep (Near-Zero Power): The ESP32 CPU, Wi-Fi, and Camera are physically powered off. Only the ULP (Ultra Low Power) co-processor and a basic digital Flame Sensor are active.

Tier 2: The Hardware Interrupt: An environmental anomaly occurs (e.g., a fire). The Flame Sensor detects the infrared signature and sends a high voltage to an RTC GPIO pin.

Tier 3: Edge Verification: The voltage spike triggers an ext0 hardware wake-up. The ESP32 powers on and briefly activates the INMP441 Microphone to run a local TinyML model, verifying the acoustic signature of the threat (e.g., crackling fire or chainsaw).

Tier 4: Visual Capture: Once verified by audio, the ESP32 powers the OV2640 camera and captures a single high-resolution JPEG.

Tier 5: Cloud Handoff: The ESP32 briefly connects to Wi-Fi, sends the JPEG and alert metadata to an n8n webhook, and instantly returns to Tier 1 Deep Sleep.

3. Hardware Bill of Materials (BOM) & Wiring Guide
Microcontroller: ESP32-CAM (with OV2640 camera module).

Programmer: FTDI USB-to-TTL Serial Converter (required to upload code to the ESP32-CAM).

Acoustic Sensor: INMP441 I2S Omnidirectional Microphone.

Environmental Tripwire: Generic Flame Sensor Module (IR Receiver) or MQ-2 Smoke Sensor.

Power: 5V Power Bank (for live demo) or 3.7V 18650 Li-ion battery with a TP4056 charging module.

Critical Wiring Constraints (ESP32-CAM Pinout):
The ESP32-CAM is notoriously short on available pins because the camera uses most of them. You must wire it exactly like this:

Flame Sensor Data Pin: Connect to GPIO 13 (This is an RTC_GPIO, which is strictly required to wake the ESP32 from Deep Sleep).

INMP441 Mic: * VDD to 3.3V

GND to GND

L/R to GND (sets channel)

WS to GPIO 14

SCK to GPIO 15

SD to GPIO 12

4. Software Stack & Tooling
A. The Edge Layer (Hardware Code)
Environment: Arduino IDE (C++).

Core Libraries: esp_sleep.h (for configuring deep sleep), esp_camera.h (for vision capture), driver/i2s.h (for the microphone).

The Sleep Logic (The winning code snippet concept):

C
// Set GPIO 13 to wake up the ESP32 when the flame sensor goes HIGH
esp_sleep_enable_ext0_wakeup(GPIO_NUM_13, 1); 

// Go to sleep to save battery
esp_deep_sleep_start(); 
B. The Automation Layer (n8n Cloud)
Since the ESP32 needs to save power, we offload all heavy routing, dashboarding, and notifications to an n8n workflow.

Node 1 (Trigger): Webhook Node (Set to listen for a POST request containing multipart form data—the image file and the text alert).

Node 2 (Router/Switch): Routes the flow based on the alert type (e.g., "Fire" goes to emergency channels, "Intruder" goes to security channels).

Node 3 (Action - Storage): Google Drive Node or AWS S3 Node to save the evidence photo securely.

Node 4 (Action - Notification): Telegram Bot Node or Twilio Node to instantly push the photo and alert to the user's phone.

5. The Live Demo Execution Strategy
To win the hackathon, your pitch must flawlessly demonstrate the transition from zero-power to full-alert.

The Setup: Have the ESP32-CAM plugged into a battery pack on the judges' table. Have a serial monitor visible on your laptop screen showing the device is in "Deep Sleep...".

The Hook: Explain the problem. "Sensors die in the forest because they never stop talking to the cloud. Our system only speaks when spoken to by a disaster."

The Trigger: Pull out a simple cigarette lighter and flick it about 6 inches from the Flame Sensor.

The Awakening: The judges will see the Serial Monitor instantly jump to life: "Hardware Interrupt Detected -> Waking up -> Capturing Image -> Connecting to Wi-Fi -> Sending to n8n..." The camera flash will trigger.

The Impact: Three seconds later, your phone (or a screen displaying your n8n workflow) lights up with a Telegram message containing the exact photo of you holding the lighter, reading "🔥 CRITICAL ALERT: FIRE DETECTED."

The Close: The Serial Monitor immediately goes back to "Entering Deep Sleep..." proving the power-saving cycle is complete.

This architecture handles the hardware, the AI/Data processing, and the cloud workflow. Focus on getting the deep-sleep ext0 wakeup working with a simple LED first, then add the camera, and finally tie it to your n8n webhook.